and Joey is up next I guess most of you
know who Joey is but as introduction
Joey is the author of G Annex he's an
emiritus Debian developer who designed
and developed many core Debian tools
such as Deb Alper and he also developed
many other useful git based utilities
such as my repos ITC keeper he has also
been working with the DAT project since
uh 2014 so welcome Joey um and he'll be
talking about Kit Annex is complete
right
[Applause]
so there's the
HDMI one second let me get my uh video
set
up uh
is it it's already oh it's already
working well wow thank you gome
okay so this is a question um get Annex
is complete right which I first heard it
from my father after I'd been working on
it for about a year you know he's like
you've been working on this for a long
time you're you're pretty much done
right and he's asked me that again
pretty much every time I see
him um but I've also heard it from
technical people who understand that
software is never actually done but
they're still like well you're pretty
much you're done you've it's feature
complete right so you know I've been
thinking about this question for a while
and it turned out to be unexpectedly
topical anybody who's following Tech
news knows about XZ and how it seemed
complete and then people were like well
no we can do something else and then
horrible things happened hopefully
that's not going to happen to me
um but um I wanted to kind of look at
this question is g a complete by looking
at the surface area of G anex in the
ecosystem that it's in um I'm kind of
thinking
about what directions is GX grown as I
as it's developed and I'm sorry if this
looks a little bit like a cell or
something I couldn't help myself um so
if you if you look at ganex you know
it's kind of in between git and the web
and lots of other
things and it kind of started as a very
simple core you know just simple simple
abilities you can add files you can get
them you can drop them you know and um
but it but right right away because it's
a very distributed system it had to
develop this special thing the ganx
branch this little organel over here
that kind of powers it to do a lot of
other things and that was a lot of added
complexity it suddenly exploded the
surface area because once I had had that
ability to store kind of data about file
about large files in the repository I
started building things like the
metadata system which you know just
simply lets you store metadata attached
to files now that was probably the first
extension where I was like is is this
actually something I should be putting
into git Annex because my my mandate is
large files in git what does metadata
really have to do with it you might want
metadata on any file it doesn't matter
if it's you know but but I did it anyway
because it was
easy which is probably a bad way to
design software but it it it seemed to
work out um so the really important um
extension of the surface area the one
that really changed everything um at
first G anx was only you would pull
files down from a g ax repository you'd
push them to another G ax repository it
was git repositories all the way but
then I was like well wait we have all
these key value stores out there on the
internet
and I made the special remotes interface
and um and this thing extends ganex into
a direction where it's kind of an open
system because there's a basically an
infinite number of key value stores out
there um so suddenly the surface area
can just expand without bounds so in a
way it's never going to be complete that
was my thinking but then um after
talking with the Eric I think Along Came
the idea of well let's just split these
things out into their own programs and
all of a sudden now it's like okay great
it's it's open it's expandable anybody
can add a program that knows how to talk
to a specific data store and it becomes
part of the gex repository so that kind
of saved me from having to implement
every single uh key value store on Earth
in hasal which was not a feasible thing
anyway um so I ended up with basic
things like S3 and um you know various
other webdav and stuff like that but I
didn't have to implement like the things
that Eric was talking about thank
goodness
um
so you know there have been other
expansions of the surface area this web
app over here is definitely my least
favorite um of them because I I was like
well GX is hard to use well I guess I'll
make some kind of a web interface for it
and then it will be easy to use and
that's great until you get users who
want something that's easy to use and
it's actually not working for them and
you're one person and then it's like oh
maybe this isn't the right direction but
it's kind of hanging around as this
appendage and Eric just said it was
useful in his talk he likes the
assistant part of it so that's great
it's still there it still works but
uh you know that's the kind of thing
that I would like to avoid extending
ganx into these areas where it turns out
not to be a good idea obviously but um
right
now I'm kind of like is there something
else is there another place that this is
going to grow and for a long time I
haven't really been seeing it the the
newest thing that seems to have some
promise is the tree Import and Export
which is pretty similar to what yck was
talking about where you where um you
have some kind of um repository out
there and you just want to pull down the
files from it add them to your
repository or at least know about them
and then you then you can manage them
just like you've check you've added them
in any other way um the idea with this
is basically we'll take all the special
remotes which are key value stores we
can also say well what if it has a bunch
of files in it with file names that
actually matter we'll we'll basically
pull from that as if it were a git
repository and make a git Branch just
like you would said get fetch from a git
repository and then you can merge it in
or whatever um when when export is
supported it also does the equivalent of
get push so it will upload files to that
um this is a neat thing I think but also
it it's kind of redundant to what's in
data lad but of course G anex is you
know in some ways larger than data lad
it it wants to be usable by people who
aren't interested in data lad it anyway
because they're not scientists for
example um and this is still kind of new
it I mean it's a few years old but I I
want to do more development work on it
um a lot of special remotes aren't
supported by it yet and the external
ones are barely supported at all all you
can um you can export but you can't
import um so that's definitely a way
that the surface area might grow but
still it kind of seems like when I think
about the big things that I'm working on
now they don't actually extend get anex
into a new realm they're kind of
backfilling where I was like oh this is
too hard like 10 years ago I you know
like there there's a thing called
distributed migration that I just added
which lets you migrate a key between say
Shaw one Shaw one and Shaw 256 but um it
solves an issue that get axis migration
has had um where you want to do that in
every repository because you don't want
to have to you don't want to migrate
once and then have to send all the
content back out that's already on the
repositories so I added distributed
migration this year it's a great feature
but it doesn't extend the surface area
at all it just makes it a little bit
easier for people who need this one
specific use case so
I've been thinking about this actually
since I submitted the talk and I was
like well maybe it's complete like in a
way it's complete it's not going to grow
in a significant way um you know data
lad seems fairly happy with it you know
occasionally there's a new interface or
something and data lad has kind of
actually added a huge quantity of
surface area which I don't have to worry
about and that is
wonderful you know and and that's good
you know it's this is not a a small
simple system but it doesn't need to
grow without bounds either right we have
a name for that when we have cells gr
without balance we don't want that
so um but then I got to
thinking and I came up with a little
idea last month um so this is a pretty
typical Network say that um the the
square over here with connected to
everything else is say your laptop and
then you have some repositories local to
you it might be a hard drive and
somebody else's computer and I don't
know an S3 remote up in the cloud
whatever um you know how to you have
ganx set up to talk to these things
great you're able to push and pull files
store things but here here Along Comes
somebody
else and you're like oh well I have five
different
repositories uh they have three
different access control methods uh I
actually can't like just give you access
to this hard drive that I plug in now
and then or I don't know it's it it it's
it's a mess you you're trying to give
them access to this but basically what
you come up with at that point is well
we're going to push it to the cloud and
then you can pull it from the cloud
which is great if you have you know
bandwidth money everything you need to
use the cloud but if you're just trying
to do this locally or on a small Network
this is a problem and you what you could
do is you could just say well friend
here you can connect to my laptop you
can get any files that I have on the
laptop if you want something else just
let me know and I'll pull it down off of
one of these other remotes and then you
can get it from my laptop great and you
can send me files to my laptop and I'll
copy them out to wherever you could do
this manually I don't think many people
do this because it seems like a real
pain and when I was thinking about this
I'm like this is an area where G anex is
really not it wants to be a fully
distributed system it wants to be
peer-to-peer it's kind of too
peer-to-peer because it makes it really
hard to deal with the situation so I
came up with this simple idea of let's
not have this be manual things you're
doing on your laptop let's have a proxy
which is SK Annex when this thing wants
a file over here it just tells the proxy
hey I would like a file from the S3
remote please stream it down through and
send it to me or it can say hey I'd like
to send the file to that drive over
there that I've heard you have I don't
know anything about it but please send
it through the proy and it will land on
the drive
um
[Music]
so of course you can extend this further
you could say oh well actually yeah I
have some drives of my own I'll be a
proxy too you know you can now pull and
push things in every direction you can
think of um you know you could be over
here on this computer use this proxy to
talk to that proxy to get a file off of
the strive you could think of these as
two different um geographical locations
maybe you know you could it's your
typical proxy kind of distributed
Network system but GX hasn't really
supported this so I have kind of a
design for this but I haven't actually
worked it all the way out um there's a
lot of difficulties um in a way you
could think of this as two clusters or
one cluster say and you just from over
here you don't really care about these
drives you don't want to need to know
which Drive do I put a file on how full
is this drive what happens if this drive
gets too full because I put files on it
you know you just want to say okay I'm
going to spread things Out Among the
cluster and I have a design that I came
up with 10 years ago and Revisited
because I 10 years ago I was like I
can't quite make this work um to B files
between these uh drives um using git
anex as preferred content system which
is what lets the repository say I want a
file if these conditions are met um so I
have kind of a design for that and it
turns out that one of the key things
that I need to implement this is to deal
with the uh what if the drive becomes
full question because if you're sto if
you're kind of like round robin storing
files between different repositories
more or less at random some of the files
are bigger than other ones some of the
drives are probably bigger than other
ones it's a heterogeneous Network
probably um and one of them will fill up
first and then if you just keep trying
to send this file to this full
repository it's it's pointless you're
just banging your head against a wall so
instead there needs to be a way for you
to learn from over here that this Drive
is full oddly enough the first probably
six months I was writing get anex I had
at least two users come to me and say
you know I really it would be cool if
you could keep track of how much free
space there was left on a remote I was
like that's too hard I'm not going to do
that it's a distributed system
why so I've Revisited that I I have a
design to do that
now it's actually a lot easier than it
seemed 12 years ago I guess I have more
experience with this kind of thing so I
have kind of a general idea of how to do
this I'm really curious to know if it
will actually extend how people um you
know in your in your Realms use get
Annex potentially because it kind of
seems to me that if you're like I don't
know a lab or something and you're
trying to collaborate with somebody else
this might be helpful when you don't
have to actually go through the
institution and say Here's all the you
know difficulties of actually doing it
right isn't the right way to put it but
we're just ad hoc doing something before
we actually publish you know something
like that
so this I think would extend G A's
surface area in a useful way um and I've
actually applied for a grant to build
this but I don't know if I'll get the
grant um so I'm searching for funding
basically I think this is going to take
about three four months of work it's you
know it's a reasonably sized project um
how am I doing on time do I have time oh
good okay wonderful so yeah um so
getting back to the question I don't
think it's done but on the other hand
that idea might be the last big idea
it's possible if so great um I have also
two do list the slong they're all good
ideas I haven't had time to implement
them or I haven't figured out how um and
of course I have a bug list that's 10
times that
long and I'm still finding significant
bugs um I found one last week that I
just was like how has this been here the
whole time and I've never noticed um
yeah um but I wanted to point out
something else a surface area uh
increase that has kind of been working
here on this slide all along I don't
know if you've noticed but I whenever I
hear people talk about data lad that
they talk about this this thing right
here and data lad run they seem to like
it a lot they're like this is really
cool it lets me like you know do
Providence as I update my whatever I
don't know what they do they're sign I
don't understand anything but I
understand that this is cool and I'm
like hm it it seems kind of close to
things that I do it's kind of storing
data in like metadata things about files
in a branch would it make sense to like
you know give this to people who aren't
scientists would they find a use for it
I don't know maybe like if you're a
photographer professional photographer
and you have raws and you want to you
know post-process them in a reproducible
way I don't know why you'd want to do
that but
it's worth thinking
about so um I could talk about more
things on here but I I think I'm
actually G to run under rather than run
over
um
um yeah I think that I think that I've
covered everything I really need to so
um you know like I said earlier I'm
really interested in talking to people
here and learning how GX is working for
you how it isn't working for you maybe
you have ideas that actually do expand
the surface area in some way maybe you
think that this uh proxy idea might have
some legs for you in your organization
or whatever I would love to talk to
people about anything like this
um I I don't feel that gentic needs to
keep being developed forever I think
that uh you know I I see what you've
done with data lad where you've
refactored you know I was really happy
to see this like you refactored all the
special purpose stuff out and got to
adjust general purpose tool which is
awesome and I'm like in some ways you've
made it you've made it simpler as you've
gone which is a really admirable thing
um and I've sometimes thought well maybe
I should you know Factor some of these
things out into their own programs but
then again that would just be
work so um anyway I'm I'm rattling on
now but thank you for your attention and
I would love to chat with any of you
this
thanks Joey uh we do have time for like
one or two questions if anyone wants to
jump in
sure I have a clarification question
when you're talking about uh this
interface layer is it about chunking
data into different repositories or is
it really about having different sources
that all have a complete copy and then
just iterating between them because I
feel like datat has that but I always
struggle to use it so I this may well
replicate something in data lad that I
don't know about because I really know
very little about data lad I know what
data lad needs from get Annex and I
don't know how they're using it in
detail and I'll occasionally find
something like yck um we call the
special remote that then gets the
tarball that then calls the special
remote that does something I'm like I
don't but
um as far as the question about chunking
that's a great question because I was
thinking about that uh just the night
before last I think maybe it's better to
actually chunk the things and spread
them out as chunks rather than as the
whole object I don't know but that's
dangerous right if if one goes down then
you have to but but of course the um you
know the thing where I was talking about
um the preferred content where it
balances you can do uh n ofm kind of
balancing so you know that at least two
nodes have a copy of every chunk or
whatever so I might think about um
making chunking be an option or be the
only way and I haven't really decided
obviously I think one of the downsides
would be in some of these situations you
know you may actually have several
computers that are all being used by
people and they just want to have
whatever files they have but you would
like to be able to access them via the
proxy anyway and so you don't want
chunks but maybe if you have a cluster
you really do want chunks maybe it
simplifies things you don't have to
rebalance stuff like that if you have
chunks are always the same size or
smaller yeah so great question Eric or
anybody someone relates to Chin uh did
you ever consider binary defin files
because what we have quite often is like
small changes files great question um I
wish let's see if this will come back up
if it doesn't it doesn't matter um so
have I considered it yes um have I
implemented it oh no uh but is there a
way to implement it yeah um kind of so I
meant to talk about the uh special
remotes there's one which is the Borg
backup special remote the way this works
is you use Borg which is a Backup Tool
you backup your get anex repository to
wherever the you know a borg repository
then you say hey get anex I backed up
your repository using Borg it's over
here get anex looks at it it says oh
cool I know everything that's stored in
this Borg repository now Borg does do uh
Deltas um it's designed to do that and
so it handles all the heavy lifting and
now you have a special remote that you
can pull files out of directly out of
the backup system or the archival system
it might be better to think of it
because if it's a backup system you're
going to rotate and lose data which
isn't what you want in this case
um now as far as putting it in G Annex
itself I've always felt like it's better
to you know defer to somebody who
actually can think about you know
rolling hashes and stuff without their
head exploding because mine has
continually exploded on this topic for
years
so
yeah cool uh we'll go on to the next
talk thank you Joey thank you